my stats are kind of screwed up and i'm
trying to fix them but it ain't going
well so life is an rp life isn't a race
it's an rpg and most of you maxed out
the wrong set so like what do y'all
think about this
like what is the what is the what are
the mechanics
what are the rules of life in
advancement you guys get that like this
is an important question and i think
it's a really important question because
they don't like teach us what the basic
mechanics of how to live life are so let
me give you all an example
so a lot of people out there who feel
like it's too late
so they feel like you know oh my god
like i missed
i missed like this milestone right like
oh i'm 24 and like i haven't graduated
from college therefore like it's too
late people feel like they screwed up so
there's this concept of like
you know missed milestones and then
people basically feel like
once they miss the boat on something
like you can't kind of go and get it
back so this kind of concept entered our
consciousness as humanity when people
found these uh you know like the wolf
children so there were some like human
beings that were raised in the wild and
didn't have access or exposure to human
language and what psychologists
discovered is that if a human like
doesn't get any access or exposure to
language by a particular
age
they it becomes impossible for them to
learn language that their brain sort of
wires in a particular way and then like
a door is forever close to them
and so the main question is like is that
generally speaking how life works like
what are the what is the rpg system
that best mirrors like how you gain
like stats and level up in life like
what does it actually work like
so
i'd say that in general life is sort of
like closest to
for lack of
there may be a better example of this
but like one of these elder scrolls
games where basically the more you do
something the more you level up in it so
the first thing is like this concept of
missed milestones i think is like not
really accurate so we see this a lot for
example
um hopefully this paper will get
published soon but we wrote a paper
about incels
where one of the key things about incels
one of the shared experience that they
have is that there's a missed milestone
of social development so they feel like
oh i've never had a girlfriend in high
school or i'm 23 and i've never had a
girlfriend or i'm 23 and never had a
boyfriend whatever
and so since they missed the boat on
something they're like forever screwed
um and so
what what the kind of concept of missed
milestone is is that
after a certain point there's been an
unchangeable course correction which has
doomed you to failure and therefore
you're like
never going to succeed
and so we see this a lot within our
community where people say like oh it's
too late for me like i'm x number of
years and i haven't done x y or z so
like i'm screwed
right and so this is another example
where people will say like they'll go
back to this kind of concept which is
that you know you've spent your time
like you've used your time or spent your
time maxing out the wrong stats so if
you spend all of your time like maxing
out your league of legends skill and
your you know
valerian skill brought to you by riot
games
um are you basically screwed
and so the short answer like in my
opinion like the answer is clearly no so
like let me give you guys a simple
example okay
so like let's say that
uh
let's say like i watch a bunch of anime
and i sort of passively acquire some
amount of japanese right so if you like
watch a bunch of anime like you
you've like wasted let's say four years
watching anime like you learn a little
bit there's some amount of like passive
xp that you get from watching anime
but people who have gone like four years
of like watching anime and like may be
able to you know say things like you
know i'll never forgive you or sakai no
tamini
or whatever right
like you're it's not you're not actually
learning anything so you can spend like
four years and then what people will
conclude is they'll say like oh i've
spent four years like wasting my time
watching
what chat like who do you what do you
take me for huh
you know
like what did you guys think that i'm a
poser did you not think that i'm one of
you
you have to remember chat that i'm one
of you it runs deep
it runs deep with me dude
it goes all the way down to the bottom
one of us
um
so what was it yeah
so like here's the first thing it's like
there's some amount of passive xp that
you get from like doing what you're
you're doing right if we live our life
and we're just sort of like passively
leveling up random skills like skills at
video games or like whatever right
learning a little bit of japanese at the
end of the day you can actually like
gain a lot of ground if you just put
your mind to it and we'll get to that in
a second so just just to give you guys
like a little bit of context right about
like how i got to where i am so
so i played a bunch of video games in
high school like i didn't know how to
play any sports like i couldn't like you
know i didn't play a musical instrument
i sort of like played a little bit of
piano but
you know stopped playing piano when i
was 15 years old and between like 15 and
like graduating high school like i
didn't really learn anything like i went
to class
passively learned stuff right because
you're sitting there in class and you're
like
passively like learning mathematics i
did the minimum amount of work necessary
to pass or sometimes didn't even pass in
high school
and then college rolled around and then
like i was 18 19 20 i was like oh i'm
gonna go to college like you know i'm
gonna party i'm gonna meet chicks like
all this stuff and then like my 20th
birthday rolled around i had never
really been on a date like never really
had a girlfriend
and um
so like
you know it was it was maybe i'd been on
something like a date but
um
and so i felt like i was like falling
behind right i felt like i had kind of
missed the boat and even like years
later when i was like 26 years old so i
graduated at the age of 22 or 23
and then like at 26 i remember going to
a holiday party
and meeting my friends who i used to be
in high school with who are now like
doctors they were like graduating
medical school and so i had like no job
like like net worth of basically zero
like didn't couldn't play an instrument
i basically had i'd spent some time in
india which i didn't realize was worth a
lot at that time
um but i basically like on paper i was
worth nothing right so i had like a
bachelor's degree in neurobiology with
like
that was three or four years old with
like no work experience some work
experience but not really anything
significant
so
you know you kind of like get to that
point in life and you're thinking like
wow i've missed all the milestones and
i'm basically screwed and so i still
remember applying to medical school and
kind of thinking like oh in four years
if i graduate like if i start med school
if i apply at 26 i could potentially get
in because the application cycle is like
one year and then you get in for the
next year so most people will apply
their junior year of college so that
they can start after their senior year
so there's like a two-year lag time for
med school so i was like if i apply now
i'll start med school when i'm 28 and
i'll finish when i'm 32. and i remember
having these thoughts that oh my god
it's going to be too late
and like i've screwed up
right that like it's
i should have done this
such a long time ago
but the truth of the matter is and then
what happens is our mind once we have
that kind of thought it like demotivates
us and we don't feel like doing anything
we're like oh my god it's too late like
i'm gg sol
i can't recover
but the truth is that in four years like
i'm going to be 32 either way like it
doesn't really matter like the real
choices do i want to be like 32 and have
an md or do i want to be a 32 and not
have an md like that's the real choice
but that's not the way that our mind
thinks about it right all it thinks
about is all the time that's passed and
all the milestones we've missed it
doesn't really think about okay what are
the different options for when i'm 32
and which one do i want to pick
so that's really important if y'all are
like kind of feeling like you've missed
out and it's too late for you let's say
you're like 25 and you've never been on
a date
and then at the age of 30 you've got
two options so you're saying okay i'm 25
gg like
forever alone right like finished
um but then like you could say like okay
three years from now like you may still
be alone or you could not be alone like
which one would you prefer and that's
what you should move towards
and this is where leveling up comes in
because i don't think that unlike rpgs i
don't think life has like diminishing
or it doesn't have like exponential more
experience required to level up
so i think life is like you can just
accrue skill points whenever you want to
by spending time doing the activity you
can level up all of your crafting skills
sequentially if you want to it doesn't
really matter you can just level up
whatever you put your mind to and this
kind of goes back to like learning past
uh japanese so you can like watch anime
for four years and learn how to say i'll
never forgive you for the sake of the
world or you can just sit down and
literally learn japanese in two months
right so if you spent like a dedicated
amount of time studying japanese and
learning japanese you can like become
proficient in the language in 60 days
that's all it takes
so this is the concept of deliberate
practice which i think malcolm gladwell
kind of like popularized is this idea
that like if you put your mind to
something you can accumulate any kind of
like skill that you want to
so it doesn't sort of matter that you've
spent all of your point it so this is
the other thing is in life like skill
points are not limited so in video games
like there's like oh we only have like
60 skill points so how do we want to
build them and if i've spent too much
time putting them into video games or
like you know anime expertise
like i'm screwed because i've used up
all my skill points this is the the big
thing about life is that
you can farm skill points every single
day like you can just wake up today and
farm a skill point if you want to
and so that's why we see you know two
kinds of people like there are people
that will excel at many many many things
and people who oftentimes excel at
nothing and we'll talk about the middle
ground in a second
and so the truth of the matter is that
even if you've maxed all of the wrong
stats you can just start maxing up other
ones right so this is kind of
interesting like i think what was it uh
um
there was a there's a great quote from
like
rome or sparta or something that you
know they they teach their warriors to
be scholars and their scholars should be
warriors because if you're a warrior who
hasn't studied things you're gonna be
like stupid and you'll make mistakes and
if you're a scholar who's never fought
like your policies won't
incorporate
like understanding of like combat and
stuff like that so i forget exactly what
the quote was if somebody can remind me
but
so i think like that's a really good
example of we have this idea in our mind
that human beings can't be both but the
truth of the matter is that you can
exercise for two hours a day if you want
to and like study for four hours a day
if you want to right like you can
actually do all of it
you don't there's not a limited number
of
um like there's not a limited number of
stat points that you'll have so even if
you've screwed things up you can still
invest it like in cultivating farming
more stat points today
and it kind of doesn't matter
oh yeah so so this is great so thank you
very much so
um
someone's saying this
oh crap
yeah the society that separates its
scholars from its warriors will have its
thinking done by cowards and it's
fighting done by fools
for us are two coming in clutch that's
exactly the quote that i was thinking of
so there's sort of this idea that we
have that there's a limited number of
stat points that we have and if you've
wasted them you can't get more which is
not true you can learn you know you can
study japanese for three months and
become proficient in it and then you can
go and study mandarin and then you can
go and study hindi and then you can go
and study arabic and within the span of
one year you can be proficient in four
languages
so this is kind of what we've seen in
our coaching program is that like
um
that it takes about so if people are
wondering so if you're someone who has
misused your stat points up until this
point the question that a lot of people
ask is
okay how long does it take for me to
like get
put my life together
and so this is where i would say there
are a couple of different things the
first is that eight weeks is the amount
of time it takes to start moving your
life in the right direction so a lot of
people feel like they have inertia lack
of motivation like they don't they're
not really doing anything eight weeks is
the amount of time that it takes to
start moving your life in the right
direction coincidentally it also appears
that eight weeks is the amount of time
that it takes to start to make
neuroscience changes in your brain like
if you consistently do something for a
period of about eight weeks
your brain will start to change
what we see in our coaching program is
that optimal outcomes tend to take about
12 weeks
so even in our content creator program
with twitch we've lengthened the program
for 8 to 12 weeks based on a year of
research so what we sort of discovered
is that people start to make change in
eight weeks and then they're really like
you know they're really like at a good
pace 12 weeks in so it takes about three
months to start to put your life
together
what we see is in a period of about 40
weeks if you're focused and put your
mind to things you can like make a
drastic change to your life so 40 weeks
is is like the kind of the minimum
amount to turn your life around in my
experience
and what i've seen with people time and
time and time again is about 40 weeks to
two years is what it takes to like turn
your life around by 180 degrees
so i've had people who were
mid-20s unemployed never had a job
making six figures a year in two years
like if they just put their mind to it
and so you may wonder like okay so what
what is it that changes over the course
of like eight week eight to forty weeks
like what are we working on so i'll give
you guys just a couple of examples so
one is that people start working on
something that i call the hidden
curriculum so these are the the
skill points that you invest in things
that like become super op so a good
example is like how to learn so if you
level up your learning ability you get
like an xp buff across all of your
different things
other examples of the hidden curriculum
are like how to communicate
how to find motivation so these core
aspects of of self that if you use
deliberate practice on these domains
if you discover like how to find
motivation how to communicate and how to
learn then all of the things after that
will become much much much better
over the course of 12 to 40 weeks what
are some neuroscience changes that we
see so a good example is like a change
in self-talk
so if we look at why people stay stuck
you know there's a little voice in your
head that will encourage you to not do
anything or it will discourage you from
making a change because it says things
like oh it's too late oh like you know
don't bother like oh like look at all
these other people so there's a little
voice in your head that actually is like
sabotaging all of your efforts
so when you work with someone like a
therapist or a coach for like 12 weeks
16 weeks 20 weeks or on your own if you
work on your self-talk it takes time to
rewire those neurons in your brain to
produce a different kind of self-talk
and what we see what i see with my
therapy patients for example is like 40
weeks
into the into therapy
what starts to happen is they'll start
to say something and then i will ask
them a question they'll say i knew you
were gonna ask that
or i'll say something to them they'll be
like i know you i knew you were gonna
say that i knew that was coming i was
dreading you saying that even when i
came into my appointment today i was
going to tell you this i didn't know
exactly what you would say so that is a
prime example of changing your self-talk
because then their brain
is able to produce what i offer them and
so the reason that i tend to work with
people for like a year or two is like
they become trained in like saying and
thinking the way that i do they
basically learn that way of thinking and
then they no longer need me then they're
like
kind of fixed right so that's like
literally changing your self-talk
so that's just how long it takes like
you have to have you know people will
ask questions like how do i gain
confidence in myself if they grew up in
an abusive household where they like
were you know taught to be not confident
the way that you gain that is by
actually exposing yourself to people who
are confident in you so we see this in
group coaching a lot where people are
like you know i'm here like they don't
realize this when they come in but we're
teaching them how to change their
self-talk and so that's why group
coaching will see a lot of like benefit
that seems to happen
suddenly
without any like warning like late in
the game 12 weeks 16 weeks in people
just start making changes in their life
and they're really like no one
understands how it happened you don't
see it coming so seven weeks eight weeks
people don't feel like they're making
any progress and then suddenly they kind
of wake up one day and they're like
starting to do really well
and how why is that it's because when
you go into group coaching and they're
like 10 people there or eight people or
six people that are
changing the way that they treat you and
they're treating you in a different way
your mind sort of gets a different
experience
so this is just kind of to summarize
like you know we kind of got off track
there but
generally speaking if you feel like
you've lost your
like if you've wasted all your points in
in life and you've like missed key
milestones the good news is that you can
learn basically at any time like the
idea of a age or i'm too old for this
unless you're like you know a woman who
wants to like bear children or something
like there's some biological you know
like
uh you know barriers which are very hard
to overcome if you're a 75 year old
woman or a man i suppose and you decide
that you want to have children like bear
a child like there may be biological
constraints
but outside of that you know if you're
25 30 35 and you want to go back to
college you want to start becoming a
game developer like you know whatever it
is that you want to do
deliberate practice and focusing your
mind on something will allow you to work
on it you can just always farm up skill
points you just have to start farming
when it comes to turning your life
around i would say eight weeks is the
amount of time it takes to start
you should be rolling by 12 weeks by 40
weeks some people will have turned their
life around and give yourself two years
of deliberate work and basically people
will ask me they'll come in with like
trauma and abuse and like being on drugs
and all this stuff and they're like my
life is nowhere i'm 26 years old you
know
how do i fix all these problems and i'll
be like give me two years
if in the worst case scenario it's taken
me about two years
i'm thinking about some patients of mine
that have really had like trauma and
addictions and like are unemployed and
in their like mid to late 20s even early
30s
and you know in a two-year time span
they are
you know in school for something that
they really care about
and so i had one patient for example who
became like a plumber
and so would work a lot and then like
was making like 80 or 100 bucks an hour
and then was also
like doing game development on the side
so they're like their passion is game
development they figured out okay i'm
gonna become a plumber i'm gonna work
nights because i'm a night owl anyway
and then the upside of working nights is
that 24-hour plumbing services you get
to charge more right because it's like
you're showing up at someone's house at
three in the morning so he'll go to
someone's house at three in the morning
work for two hours and make like five
hundred dollars
and then if he doesn't get any calls
he's just working on his game design
it's like it's a great life that he's
crafted but it takes about two years to
get there
so does that make sense so at the end of
the day life is an rpg like that's
totally fine if you've wasted all your
stat points and the wrong skills like
that's okay too you can just farm up
more stat points all it takes deliberate
practice and patience
you